Chief Justice, distinguished guests, valued colleagues, and Albertans from across our great province.

Welcome to the Legislative Assembly.

Welcome to the first day of Alberta’s new government!

As I stand here on the steps of your Legislature -- the front doors of which are open today -- I look out and I see the faces of today’s Alberta.

The faces of our growing and welcoming province. Of the families that make our diverse communities strong. The faces of our province’s future and our amazing potential.

Today we open a new chapter in the story of Alberta.

From our earliest days, Albertans have worked as hard as anyone to forge a brighter future.

People from all walks of life, from every part of world, joined together on a common journey.

And on that journey we’ve been guided by enduring values.

Albertans are hard-working. We are entrepreneurial. And we are relentlessly optimistic.

We believe that tomorrow can be a better day. And that we must work hard to make it happen.

That’s who we are as Albertans.

And through grit and determination, we’ve accomplished great things.

We’ve built cities that families and businesses are choosing to call home.

We’ve built universities and colleges that attract the brightest minds and help our students reach their full potential.

We’ve built farms and rural communities that weather the toughest storms to support all of our families.

We’ve built new industries and made fresh discoveries that are powering a brighter future for our province.

And, together, we are creating new opportunities for each other – and for people from around the world.

That’s the spirit of Alberta that moves us forward.  It drives us to succeed.

It’s the spirit that allows Albertans to reach higher – and to reach out to each other.

Because our optimism is rooted in the strength and the resilience of our communities.

We care about each other. And we stand up for one another, especially when it matters most.

40 below weather will teach you that.

Those are the values that have built our province. And they will guide our government, too.

So, today, as I stand here with you, I’m thinking of every Albertan who works to build our province.

I’m thinking of the shift workers, the farmers, the ranchers, and roughnecks who are working to raise their families.

Of the business people and job creators who invest their hearts – and their life savings – to create something of their own.

The teachers who inspire our children, and the health care professionals who provide the best care for all of us in our most vulnerable moments.

And every Albertan who gives something of themselves to build strong communities.

Because of all of you, Alberta is the province it has become. The province we all love.

And it’s because of your work, and your optimism, that Alberta has a bright future.

Today, I am filled with a deep sense of confidence in what that future will bring.

I am humbled by your trust, by the job at hand, and by our amazing potential.

It’s true, we are living in challenging times.

The collapse in oil prices reaches into every community in the province.

Too many Albertans are kept awake at night, worried about where their next paycheque is coming from.

Too many families are struggling to pay the bills at the end of the month.

And too many Albertans, and far too many children, continue to live in poverty.

Our province can do better.

For all of us to share in the promise of our prosperity, we must do better.

That’s why Albertans have chosen a new government -- a stable majority government that will put the right priorities first.

A government that shares the very same values that built our province and our prosperity.

Today we take another step forward to deliver on that promise.

Albertans have elected a remarkable team of women and men to serve our province.

The new Members of your Legislative Assembly embody hope and optimism.

And they bring rich and diverse experiences of Alberta life to this building.

Your new MLAs include accomplished leaders in our communities, in business, and in public life.

They are social workers and nurses. Teachers and doctors. Community activists and students.

Young and older, gay and straight, and more women than ever before.

And they will work every day to listen to Albertans, to earn public trust, and to deliver on our commitments.

From this talented team, I have selected our new Cabinet.

Eleven dedicated and determined women and men who will focus firmly on solving the challenges ahead.

For the first time in many years, we have an efficient and lean Cabinet to get down to work and deliver results.

This is a Cabinet that is built to work. And to get the job done.

To partner with Alberta’s job creators – in energy, forestry, agriculture, high-tech, tourism and small business – to grow and diversify our economy.

To give our children the best chance to succeed and the right start in school.

To protect and strengthen our public health care, so it’s there when families need it.

And to restore trust and integrity in government – a government that belongs to Albertans.

In the coming days, the Legislature will meet to take our first steps and begin the important work that Albertans have asked us to do.

We will reach out across the aisle to our friends and colleagues in the Opposition to serve the best interests of our province.

And every step of the way, our strong and stable government will listen to Albertans.

Because we work for you – all of you.

And we will act to deliver on the task you have given us: To help build a more prosperous, a more caring, and a more hopeful province for every Albertan.

Albertans know that our province is stronger when every Albertans shares in our prosperity.

We know that we are all healthier when we protect our fresh air and clean water.

That our future is brighter when First Nations can control their destiny – and can trust a true partner in government to build a new relationship of respect.

We know that the fabric of every community is tighter when we welcome new Albertans with open arms.

And that we can all reach a little higher when we ensure that every child can reach their life’s full potential.

So, on this historic day, we are, once again, joining together in pursuit of our common dream.

The same dream that has inspired generations of Albertans.

A dream founded on the idea that change is possible – and that a better future awaits.

It is springtime in Alberta, and a fresh wind is blowing.

To harness its potential, the hard work begins today.

Thank you.